David Schaich (he): Okay, welcome back to statistical physics on a Monday morning ---
David Schaich (he): the last Monday in February. So at least it's getting lighter every week. I think there are
David Schaich (he): more people online than in the room for a change. So I'll try to remember to keep an eye on the chat window, in case there are any questions.  I suppose
David Schaich (he): you're probably right now
David Schaich (he): busy dealing with the homework assignment, right on the heels of the computer project.
David Schaich (he): But the
David Schaich (he): positive aspect of that is that once you're through with that (due tomorrow), then you'll be free from assessment in this module
David Schaich (he): until after the spring break.  So that will be a
David Schaich (he): chance for you to relax, and me to catch up with the marking, which
David Schaich (he): I still need to --- already need to catch up on, since I have various other end-of-the-month deadlines to deal with.  But I hope not to
David Schaich (he): take too much longer with that. So before I forget
David Schaich (he): the 6-digit code for today is 6, 1, 1,
David Schaich (he): 8, 9, 4.  And
David Schaich (he): I should ask you if there are any questions about that homework assignment
David Schaich (he): or about what we covered last week.
David Schaich (he): I'll just briefly recap before
David Schaich (he): moving on to applications of the canonical
David Schaich (he): if you're in question
David Schaich (he): reminder, so that doesn't get lost on all those
David Schaich (he): assessments that last week we wrapped up the micro canonical.
David Schaich (he): On some let me start discussion of it.
David Schaich (he): I
David Schaich (he): defining the temperature in terms of how the entropy responds to a change in the energy. If a fixed number of particles. And we also refer to that
David Schaich (he): this definition of this.
David Schaich (he): that obvious to you, looked at it where it comes from it behaved sensibly. We consider heat exchange between
David Schaich (he): 2 different subsystems. The hotter system uses energy to the colder system.
David Schaich (he): and their temperatures approach each other.
David Schaich (he): I'm going to stand it
David Schaich (he): significantly More time on the
David Schaich (he): this week anymore. Next week, probably the week after that which.
David Schaich (he): in contrast to the micro
David Schaich (he): switch to
David Schaich (he): the same
David Schaich (he): illustration, we had the micro canonical ensemble on the left, which
David Schaich (he): directly applies conservation of energy to our collection of end degrees of freedom itself. But this requires that those free to be
David Schaich (he): completely isolated
from the rest of the universe, unable to exchange
David Schaich (he): particle, number and or energy, E, which in practice is not very useful, because it provides
David Schaich (he): no way for anyone on the outside to look in and learn anything about what's going on inside that system.
David Schaich (he): So what is much more
David Schaich (he): useful is the so called the canonical ensemble.
David Schaich (he): which.
David Schaich (he): instead of directly conserving the energy, he said, fixes the temperature by allowing energy exchange with
David Schaich (he): some large external from a reservoir.
David Schaich (he): still fixing the number of particles in the system
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): the starting point for analyzing the
David Schaich (he): zoom back in.
David Schaich (he): as we will see several times
David Schaich (he): today as we go through applications of this.
David Schaich (he): I want to
David Schaich (he): begin each analysis by computing the so-called partition function
David Schaich (he): functions there that sums over all of the micro States.
David Schaich (he): exponential factors of the inverse temperature. Beta times, the energy of each microstate which I actually had it
David Schaich (he): written out next up above it.
David Schaich (he): the screen on the thing to consider for today. Equivalently we also defined
David Schaich (he): to help this free energy
David Schaich (he): that repackages the same information
David Schaich (he): with a logarithm that simplifies some relations. The biggest song. This collection of information about all of the microstates of the system
David Schaich (he): derive quantities. We will be interested in. including things like the average internal energy. She is no longer been served, but fluctuates around a well-defined.
David Schaich (he): The entropy remains important
David Schaich (he): derive quantity in the canonical ensemble just as it was in the micro canonical case.
David Schaich (he): and we also
David Schaich (he): to find the heat capacity.
David Schaich (he): The relation between temperature and energy
David Schaich (he): that in the homework you show is always non-negative and generally positive, so that
David Schaich (he): increasing the temperature that is fixed in our canonical approach increases that internal energy.
David Schaich (he): and the plan for today is applications of the canonical ensemble first to the physics of information looking at 2 different spin systems. So any questions about
David Schaich (he): that catch up before we move on.
David Schaich (he): So one that
David Schaich (he): remarkable aspect of statistical physics. That is very important to a lot of ongoing research that's in
David Schaich (he): quantum information science, and some of the names of black holes, things that we
David Schaich (he): can't get you in this module without quantum mechanics or general relativity, is the fact that
David Schaich (he): information itself is physical and
David Schaich (he): not only physical, but the foundational aspect of a lot of physical systems. To be
David Schaich (he): sure. information, common sense.
David Schaich (he): how they system
David Schaich (he): leads to physically observable effects.
David Schaich (he): We will now see an example of this
David Schaich (he): in the
David Schaich (he): in the context of the simple spin systems that we've introduced
David Schaich (he): already in the micro canonical ensemble. and we will
David Schaich (he): consider 2 different variations of
David Schaich (he): you spin systems depending on whether or not the degrees of freedom are
David Schaich (he): able to be distinguished from each other. So
David Schaich (he): we'll see how the spins in these systems can be either distinguishable or indistinguishable.
David Schaich (he): and this will have significant effects on
David Schaich (he): the derived quantities that we get from the canonical on sample based on this partition function
David Schaich (he): before diving into that.
David Schaich (he): I should probably emphasize that
David Schaich (he): we're really concerned with. When I say information, content is not the information that we or anyone else might have about any of these systems.
David Schaich (he): but
David Schaich (he): really what is
David Schaich (he): know about them in principle it doesn't matter
David Schaich (he): whether or not anyone or anything actually knows
David Schaich (he): the information. But what can be known about a new system?
David Schaich (he): What information content it has. We will determine how it behaves physically.
David Schaich (he): So.
David Schaich (he): to start with like more concrete example.
David Schaich (he): we can
David Schaich (he): make things distinguishable
David Schaich (he): by say, fixing them
David Schaich (he): at
David Schaich (he): certain locations in
David Schaich (he): a solid material.
David Schaich (he): So the you
David Schaich (he): set up to have in mind is. we have our usual upward and down the pointing spins
David Schaich (he): just in a one-dimensional line.
David Schaich (he): and then we say that these are embedded
David Schaich (he): in some so
David Schaich (he): so lattice of spins the canonical approach. The number of spins in the temperature is fixed.
David Schaich (he): There is an external magnetic field strength. H. That in terms of the energy each of these spin configurations.
David Schaich (he): and because the spins are fixed at a no location.
David Schaich (he): and the observer can look at the corresponding location in that solid, and know which of these things
David Schaich (he): they are looking at.
David Schaich (he): so they can tell the parts whether this or spin is pointing up or down, and distinguish that from the third spin or the fifth spin
David Schaich (he): in a way that would not be possible. If, as we will see, the spins, work trees and move around each other, we will not be able to label them in that way.
David Schaich (he): So.
David Schaich (he): because we are able to distinguish all the of these spins, you have the
David Schaich (he): usual
David Schaich (he): system, or the usual accounting the same physics with the same mathematics.
David Schaich (he): possibly a coin. In times the number of microstates that we have
David Schaich (he): is to the power of N. There are 2 possible
David Schaich (he): orientations for each of the
David Schaich (he): they all those microstates omega i.
David Schaich (he): An economical approach
David Schaich (he): microstate omega, i. Has energy, e. Sub. I.
David Schaich (he): The probability that depends
David Schaich (he): exponentially
David Schaich (he): on both that energy and
David Schaich (he): the fixed temperature of the system normalized by the partition function.
David Schaich (he): and to make the mathematics that we want to go through a bit easier. and that
David Schaich (he): introduce some slightly more elegant notation. So, rather than talking about.
David Schaich (he): since they are up and down and plus and minus being the
David Schaich (he): total number of spins
David Schaich (he): and label the spins that are parallel to the magnetic field.
David Schaich (he): just as
David Schaich (he): plus ones those that are anti parallel.
David Schaich (he): It's minus one.
David Schaich (he): and then
David Schaich (he): the energy takes
David Schaich (he): we simple form. There is a contribution of minus h. which upward one to the parallel spin
David Schaich (he): and contribution to plus h for each anti-parallel spin.
David Schaich (he): So going against the magnetic fields to it higher energy.
David Schaich (he): So for the microstate omega I that is specified
David Schaich (he): bye
David Schaich (he): the you orientations of these and spins
David Schaich (he): s one through S. N. The energy is just minus h times the sum of these variables.
David Schaich (he): And as forecast, just to the start
David Schaich (he): of today's lecture, we will always begin these canonical analyses
David Schaich (he): with the partition function.
David Schaich (he): and then use that to derive
David Schaich (he): all of the quantities of interest. So the call partition function for distinguishable spins.
David Schaich (he): Zen. So d you for distinguishable.
David Schaich (he): This is the sum over all microstates Exponential You, said I.
David Schaich (he): We have an expression for the energy as a sum over all of the spins.
David Schaich (he): and we said that the 2 N.
David Schaich (he): To the power in hospital microstates. some over all the possible orientations of all in of the skills. plus or minus one in our new notation.
David Schaich (he): And then the exponential of mine is paid at times energy.
David Schaich (he): It's Beta H.
David Schaich (he): Times that some over all the spins my very loss, and for those spins.
David Schaich (he): and I will save a bit of ank by defining it. A variable X, which is this combination.
David Schaich (he): A beta times H. The magnetic field in
David Schaich (he): units of the temperature. And we can notice that. And this simple system, or the spins. Don't interact with each other.
David Schaich (he): This spin s One
David Schaich (he): can be pulled out through all of the other summations, so we break up this exponential of the product into it.
David Schaich (he): Sorry, the exponential of the song as a product and exponentials. Everything that depends on spin s one
David Schaich (he): be pulled out
David Schaich (he): to the front.
David Schaich (he): Similarly for S. 2, S. 3, and so on to the final summation over
David Schaich (he): it should be capital, and
David Schaich (he): and then this is even
David Schaich (he): simpler, because each of these sums that is now being multiplied together are exactly the same.
David Schaich (he): We just have. and powers
David Schaich (he): of a single sum.
David Schaich (he): E to the power
David Schaich (he): x times s. 3 to the nth power.
David Schaich (he): and there are only 2 terms in this sum. Where s is
David Schaich (he): plus one in the x, or
David Schaich (he): minus one. which we can recognize as
David Schaich (he): twice the hyperbolic cosine of X, which is
David Schaich (he): Beta H. All of that raised to the
David Schaich (he): and power. And this sort of simplification in
David Schaich (he): in an analysis of a system with a large number of degrees of freedom that ends up being just a single expression raised to a large power corresponding to all those degrees of freedom
David Schaich (he): is known as factorization.
David Schaich (he): This is just a brief assigned with a bit of terminology. It is something that we will see repeatedly
David Schaich (he): until we get to interacting systems, probably after the spring break.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): it dramatically simplifies the mathematical treatment of these non interacting systems.
David Schaich (he): All the particles
David Schaich (he): just behave the same, and we end up with end powers of a single particle.
David Schaich (he): In this case partition function can be helpful.
David Schaich (he): Free energy that corresponds
David Schaich (he): to this partition function for n distinguishable spins
David Schaich (he): the fixed up at your team.
David Schaich (he): We can recall from last week that the almost free energy
David Schaich (he): what's minus t times logarithm of the partition function. changing variables here to work in terms of that inverse temperature, Beta.
David Schaich (he): which is so terms that pack of tea
David Schaich (he): into a factor of one over data.
David Schaich (he): and the logarithm brings the power down out front. We have
David Schaich (he): minus n times, the one out of the
David Schaich (he): all that over the inverse temperature data.
David Schaich (he): and this is all the setup that we need to compute things like
David Schaich (he): the average internal energy
David Schaich (he): in the case of distinguishable spins. We saw last week that this was
David Schaich (he): minus temperature, squared you by the temperature of as comfortable as free energy divided by the temperature.
David Schaich (he): and I didn't write it explicitly, but should be easy enough to convince yourself that it's minus t squared D by a t
David Schaich (he): is a. Derivative with respect to the inverse temperature beta
David Schaich (he): of beta time staff which just cancels out that overall factor of one over data. and it comes minus and
David Schaich (he): 2 calls
David Schaich (he): in the H,
David Schaich (he): which is simpler than it might look at first. because the derivative of the law that brings his arguments down to the down there
David Schaich (he): and then the product rule takes the derivative of the argument of that long it should be derivative of a hyperbolic cosine is a hyperbolic sign
David Schaich (he): with that same factor of this 2,
David Schaich (he): and then finally, the argument of that
David Schaich (he): hyperbolic cosine i'm. In another iteration of the chain rule to give a factor of H. So the 2 is cancel. and we end up with
David Schaich (he): minus N. Times H. Times
David Schaich (he): the ratio of cinch over to which is
David Schaich (he): hyperbolic engines. A Tch. a paper H.
David Schaich (he): So we simple function for the internal energy
David Schaich (he): coming from this factorized partition function. and the entropy
David Schaich (he): we saw last week is related to
David Schaich (he): the difference between the internal energy
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): the help of it's free energy. and it is. and just picking up
David Schaich (he): the same sorts of behavior from each of these the
David Schaich (he): N. Times H. Tang from the energy just pick up a factor of the inverse data.
David Schaich (he): It cancels out
David Schaich (he): in the free energy.
David Schaich (he): It's 2 negative signs us with
David Schaich (he): and more
David Schaich (he): to cost data. H: So we have survived
David Schaich (he): the usual quantities that we're interested in, or a system of n distinguishable spin is embedded in a solid.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): it's some insight into what these.
David Schaich (he): in some cases complicated mathematical expressions what they mean. I'll just buy it. calling them like, so
David Schaich (he): probably can't it.
David Schaich (he): Both expressions and plots on the screen at the same time.
David Schaich (he): But maybe the easy thing to start off with is the
David Schaich (he): energy. So that's the red line down here.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. Normalized the energy vial
David Schaich (he): and the number of particles times. The external magnetic field to this line
David Schaich (he): is just
David Schaich (he): negative tch of
David Schaich (he): beta H,
David Schaich (he): which ends up, being
David Schaich (he): the inverse of
David Schaich (he): the quantity on the horizontal axis. Here the temperature divided by the magnetic field or one over Beta H.
David Schaich (he): So we do that
David Schaich (he): as the temperature gets low that corresponds to
David Schaich (he): the inverse temperature, Beta going to infinity.
David Schaich (he): and the argument
David Schaich (he): of the change itself is going to infinity.
David Schaich (he): and, as we can see, approaches minus one.
David Schaich (he): as the asymptotically low energy
David Schaich (he): limit.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): it's actually let's see.
David Schaich (he): Go ahead here.
David Schaich (he): Low temperature limits. maybe going to infinity.
David Schaich (he): and H.
David Schaich (he): Beta, h
David Schaich (he): goes just to minus and H, which we can recognize as the
David Schaich (he): ground state energy.
David Schaich (he): he not
David Schaich (he): from
David Schaich (he): our micro canonical analysis of spin systems
David Schaich (he): in the past few weeks. So this is what were you
David Schaich (he): could have expected just by physical arguments rather than going through mathematics. That
David Schaich (he): Hi! How are you?
David Schaich (he): Low energies? The ground state with the minimum energy is picked out.
David Schaich (he): thanks to the exponential suppression
David Schaich (he): of any microstates with
David Schaich (he): higher energies
David Schaich (he): from this gives distribution
that it contains.
David Schaich (he): And we can also. from that same sort of physical argument as well as from the mathematics.
David Schaich (he): I appreciate why the entropy itself goes to 0 in that low temperature limit.
David Schaich (he): There we end up with
David Schaich (he): really only that single micro state, corresponding to all the spins align with the magnetic field
David Schaich (he): that completely determines the energy
David Schaich (he): in that 0 temperature limits.
David Schaich (he): as well as all other properties of the system
David Schaich (he): so physically. as we approach
David Schaich (he): so called absolute 0,
David Schaich (he): we are ending up with it just a single micro state corresponding to that ground state.
David Schaich (he): And you're calling that the
David Schaich (he): entropy micro
David Schaich (he): the logarithm of the number of microstates
David Schaich (he): that single microstate, one just gives 0 entropy. which we can also
David Schaich (he): confirm mathematically from this expression.
David Schaich (he): It's fine.
David Schaich (he): noting that as Beta goes to in Trinity, it's like
David Schaich (he): is to you some of the beta h plus e to the minus beta h e to the minus infinity goes to 0. So this just becomes the Lord
David Schaich (he): up into the Beta ancient that limit which is the to h itself. and the entropy
David Schaich (he): sd goes to
David Schaich (he): I just in Beta H.
David Schaich (he): I'm the tch goes to one
David Schaich (he): at low energies
David Schaich (he): plus and
David Schaich (he): data in from the logarithm of a hyperbolic cosine term. Those 2 terms cancel off and give us 0.
David Schaich (he): What is perhaps more interesting than the asymptotic limit at
David Schaich (he): vanishingly small temperature, absolute 0 and Beta going to infinity
David Schaich (he): use.
David Schaich (he): How do these functions approach that limit when the temperature is
David Schaich (he): small? But non-zero
David Schaich (he): so is it going to be that it's large. You see there's some interesting curvature
David Schaich (he): going on in these 2 functions which we can
David Schaich (he): get some insight into by expanding
David Schaich (he): our results. In the case of low temperatures.
David Schaich (he): and this will be
David Schaich (he): okay
David Schaich (he): relevant for the second homework assignments. It will be some work for you to do exploring this sort of thing on there.
David Schaich (he): but at the moment it's also going to be physically revealing.
David Schaich (he): because what we will see is that when the temperature is low, but not 0. You will
David Schaich (he): have contributions from
David Schaich (he): the higher energy micro states
David Schaich (he): which have
David Schaich (he): energy e sub. I. Larger than the ground State energy exactly sometimes called excited states.
David Schaich (he): and we can expect them to be exponentially
David Schaich (he): suppressed.
David Schaich (he): Bye. the corresponding probabilities.
David Schaich (he): Boltzmann factor, the exponential of minus
David Schaich (he): E. Of I. Over T.
David Schaich (he): Where there's a complication that
David Schaich (he): each excitement, state, energy, clinical response to many distinct microstates. Again depending on the information content of the system
David Schaich (he): in the case of spin systems.
David Schaich (he): Yes.
David Schaich (he): excited states and higher energy
David Schaich (he): levels can be organized in
David Schaich (he): a useful way.
David Schaich (he): You see that all these excited states fall into the discrete pattern of energy levels. they all separated by the constant shift with the energy
David Schaich (he): more what it's called Energy Gap
David Schaich (he): to zoom out to get that the whole page on the screen here. So this energy gap the delta, the between neighboring
David Schaich (he): energy levels in the spin system. So in the case where we have
David Schaich (he): n minus plus one gather recording spins that are online against the magnetic field
David Schaich (he): compared to in case of just and minus spins aligned against the magnetic field.
David Schaich (he): Oh. we've seen that the
David Schaich (he): energy
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): minus h times
David Schaich (he): 2 n plus minus n. Every increase in and minus is a decrease in n plus. so that negative one factor for and plus
David Schaich (he): coming in with 2 times. Nh. Means that factor with 2 H.
David Schaich (he): With everything else cancelling out between those 2 energy levels.
David Schaich (he): So this is the energy gap between energy levels for
David Schaich (he): any spin system. And it is this. yeah, that
David Schaich (he): real control. The corrections are the approach to
David Schaich (he): 0 temperature limits.
David Schaich (he): I should say 0 temperature limits for each of the quantities that we are interested in.
David Schaich (he): So if we look at
David Schaich (he): the average internal energy normalized by the number of particles and the external field. which is just this hypnotic tangent of Beta H.
David Schaich (he): That's fine. Here
David Schaich (he): I want to expand this at
David Schaich (he): low temperatures. but not 0.
David Schaich (he): So that is It's Beta H. Much larger than what?
David Schaich (he): This is not the natural regime for
David Schaich (he): a serious expansion of the hyperbolic engine may remember that
David Schaich (he): the series for the ever got like tangent with small Beta H. It's just
David Schaich (he): x. The arguments plus x cubed over 3,
David Schaich (he): and so on. But that's
David Schaich (he): the opposite limit of high temperatures. Beta age, much less than one.
David Schaich (he): Consider that in due course put it into
David Schaich (he): Expand this hyperbolic tangent. We really need to go back to
David Schaich (he): it's definition under the hood
David Schaich (he): as a ratio of
David Schaich (he): hyperbolic signs and cosines. What if we cancel out over all factors of the plus beta? H. We have this ratio of that I call it
David Schaich (he): looks familiar.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): because Beta H. Is much larger than one, these exponential factors.
David Schaich (he): e to the minus 2 beta H. All right. exponentially suppressed compared to one.
David Schaich (he): and we can expand
David Schaich (he): the one over one plus x
David Schaich (he): or X's. This exponential factor as
David Schaich (he): the geometric series.
It's one minus
David Schaich (he): x minus 2 beta h plus order x squared
David Schaich (he): for me to h
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): all that. This is as a reminder of It's been a while since you've done serious expansions.
David Schaich (he): Geometric series, one over one minus X is the some
David Schaich (he): K equals 0 to infinity
David Schaich (he): of the to the power, hey?
David Schaich (he): So long as
David Schaich (he): X's. Well, the radius of convergence goes all the way out to it does not include x equals one. In this case we have.
David Schaich (he): if every small value of X E to the minus 2, so that we can.
David Schaich (he): Okay, this series after the first non-trivial term K: One
David Schaich (he): and just leave the rest of it as
David Schaich (he): some collection of terms, the largest of which is
David Schaich (he): this E. To the minus 4 theta H.
David Schaich (he): So, multiplying out these 2 factors.
David Schaich (he): we end up with first the overall minus one. then 2 factors of
David Schaich (he): minus E to the minus 2 Beta H, into which come with a negative sign that cancels the one out front.
David Schaich (he): so 2 e to the minus 2, Beta H. And then we can just ignore everything higher.
David Schaich (he): Small corrections in the high temperature regime.
David Schaich (he): and as advertised. you can recognize the energy gap delta e equals 2 page in this expression. Minus one is the
David Schaich (he): limit of the energy.
David Schaich (he): As the temperature goes to absolute 0. And then there is the exponentially suppressed correction. and
David Schaich (he): 2 H delta E with the negative sign over temperature, one over beta.
David Schaich (he): plus the order of the exponential of
David Schaich (he): twice that under she normalized by the temperature
David Schaich (he): services.
David Schaich (he): the expected exponential suppression
David Schaich (he): i'm excited to see it effects at
David Schaich (he): low temperatures
David Schaich (he): which we argued.
David Schaich (he): we we should expect, based on the form
David Schaich (he): of the Boltzmann factor in the economical. One side of the probabilities are proportional to the exponential would be to the
David Schaich (he): the exponential of minus energy over temperature. See ratio of the probability for having and minus one spins. Why? Because the magnetic field
David Schaich (he): in this ratio of probabilities. The
David Schaich (he): partition function cancels off. This is out. We just have that
David Schaich (he): e to the N minus one
David Schaich (he): over t.
David Schaich (he): which is e to the
David Schaich (he): minus state of times, the energy gap.
David Schaich (he): and just looking at
David Schaich (he): the form of the plot.
David Schaich (he): she just barely fits on the same screen with the mathematical expression you derive.
David Schaich (he): We can appreciate that the slow temperatures or
David Schaich (he): showing
David Schaich (he): this exponential. exponentially rapid approach 2 0 temperature, limited minus one. So that's in this region, where.
David Schaich (he): as the temperature goes to 0. We get very close to minus one exponentially quickly. But Don't quite
David Schaich (he): get all the way there until the end temperature reaches absolute 0,
David Schaich (he): we can do It's similar low temperature expression for. or the temperature, expansion, or the entropy
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): mobilizing that by the constant factor of N.
David Schaich (he): That was present in both of these terms
David Schaich (he): that we computed always.
David Schaich (he): there's the actual
David Schaich (he): expression. So pulling up the overall end, we have 2 terms
David Schaich (he): for the entropy.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. minus Beta H.
David Schaich (he): Times, the hyperbolic tangents of Beta Age.
David Schaich (he): which is
David Schaich (he): just
David Schaich (he): the constant factor Times
David Schaich (he): the form of the energy that we expanded up here.
David Schaich (he): So that's and we F. C is minus one plus 2 e to the minus
David Schaich (he): plus order
David Schaich (he): e to the minus 2. The delta e. The other term was just pointing out that end
David Schaich (he): log
David Schaich (he): of twice the hyperbolic.
David Schaich (he): I'm: a.
David Schaich (he): which is worth dealing with
David Schaich (he): separately. So
David Schaich (he): going back to yeah definition of these hyper trigonometric functions.
David Schaich (he): Yeah, inside the logarithm, E to the x plus e to the minus x for x is beta h
David Schaich (he): can pull out that you know the Beta H factor.
David Schaich (he): and then use the properties of the logarithm to break up the log of the product into
David Schaich (he): some of laws.
David Schaich (he): So the is just the argument, beta h
David Schaich (he): one plus e to the minus 2 beta age.
David Schaich (he): This exponential factor is our very small expansion parameter. and we hopefully familiar to the log of one, let's say, a small number
David Schaich (he): is just that small number itself E to the minus 2 beta age again, plus
David Schaich (he): corrections of that small number, square cube, and so on.
David Schaich (he): So you
David Schaich (he): terms we can neglect, Begin with the
David Schaich (he): for me to h the exponential factor squared.
David Schaich (he): So.
David Schaich (he): adding these 2 terms together.
David Schaich (he): you can see that the
David Schaich (he): minus Beta H from the first term, that minus one times, beta h or cancel off, we plus we at the second term.
David Schaich (he): and then that leaves
David Schaich (he): 2 terms that
David Schaich (he): depend on E to the minus 2 beta age, which is e to the minus beta times the energy gap delta e.
David Schaich (he): The first of these has. hey? 2 times.
David Schaich (he): I should say the negative sign here is that same negative sign up front.
David Schaich (he): So i'm going very quickly with those
David Schaich (he): hopefully. you're able to convince yourself that the signs are coming out
David Schaich (he): correctly.
David Schaich (he): So we have 2 Beta h, which is beta times the energy gap.
David Schaich (he): almost each of the
David Schaich (he): minus beta delta e. and then plus
David Schaich (he): this term here you to the minus.
David Schaich (he): and then order
David Schaich (he): Oh.
David Schaich (he): the exponential of twice that energy gap divided by the temperature. So even though so, it's a slightly different behavior than the
David Schaich (he): no energy corrections to the energy you just have that single exponential factor. You'll be having
David Schaich (he): 2 exponential factors, one of which is multiplied by a large number data.
David Schaich (he): I see a constant energy gap. It's much larger than one.
David Schaich (he): but even that large factor is still overwhelmed by this exponential suppression
David Schaich (he): in the behavior that we're plotting here.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. Approach of the entropy in blue to its low energy limits
David Schaich (he): looks just as rapid as the approach of the energy.
David Schaich (he): Despite this large factor of
David Schaich (he): Beta that is, in front of the meeting term.
David Schaich (he): so many questions about. I did the physics that
David Schaich (he): it's
David Schaich (he): mathematics that we've done to
David Schaich (he): expand the energy and entropy at those temperatures.
David Schaich (he): and see the concrete form.
David Schaich (he): how the energy gap is controlling the approach to absolute 0.
David Schaich (he): I'm not seeing. Anyhow.
David Schaich (he): it's just about time or break to
David Schaich (he): I can, either. From all of these manipulations i'll just
David Schaich (he): forecast to that.
David Schaich (he): Once we get back from that break at 10,
David Schaich (he): well look at the opposite limit.
David Schaich (he): I'll see you
David Schaich (he): derive qualities for distinguishable spins in the canonical ensemble. looking at the limit of high temperature.
David Schaich (he): It's going to 0,
David Schaich (he): as we know the
David Schaich (he): and we all like tangents of at a large number
David Schaich (he): is going to 0, so it's steadily approaching at 0. We will see that the entropy, by contrast
David Schaich (he): approaches a
David Schaich (he): non-zero. By that constant
David Schaich (he): I was already given here we'll derive that. Let me come back after the break, then
David Schaich (he): turn to the case of indisputable spins, and see how things differ depending on their information.
David Schaich (he): So i'll pause the recording that you
David Schaich (he): get a bit refreshed, and then come back at 10 to pick up with the remainder of this
David Schaich (he): physics of information calculation.
David Schaich (he): not seeing any questions. No, I
David Schaich (he): quickly wrap up this analysis and distinguishable spin systems, and the canonical ensemble
David Schaich (he): a high temperature. Expansion for
David Schaich (he): energy is
David Schaich (he): simpler than the lower temperature case. because now arguments on the side of all the tangent is
David Schaich (he): the small expansion Parameter X,
David Schaich (he): much less than one that we
David Schaich (he): have to deal with high temperature limit where the inverse temperature beta is going to 0.
David Schaich (he): It's the
David Schaich (he): fixed strength. H of the
David Schaich (he): external related feel. as I mentioned earlier.
Yeah.
David Schaich (he): Usual serious expansion for the hyperbolic tangent. Very small value of X is
David Schaich (he): X itself. plus one third
David Schaich (he): or minus one through X queue to rather with the negative sign that
David Schaich (he): cancels out, and then higher order terms that
David Schaich (he): I mean it over the right Beta H to the fifth. We can neglect in this little bit of high temperatures. so as bet it goes to 0. This is going to 0 as forecast
David Schaich (he): that's great infinite temperature limit of this system. and we can also see that the approach to 0
David Schaich (he): here is
David Schaich (he): linear in Beta H. Or
David Schaich (he): one over X, as opposed to the exponential approach to the low temperature limit. So in agreement with this plot, here
David Schaich (he): much slower, approach polynomial in one over
David Schaich (he): Beta H.
David Schaich (he): As opposed to the exponential approach to the low temperature limits.
David Schaich (he): And one other thing we can recognize in this result.
David Schaich (he): This is temperature going to infinity.
David Schaich (he): I put out a supplemental
David Schaich (he): pencast last week, looking at the temperature of the micro canonical spin system which I should have mentioned when doing the recap
David Schaich (he): an hour ago. But there you saw
David Schaich (he): that in the micro canonical case.
David Schaich (he): do you
David Schaich (he): temperature for a spin system of this sort?
David Schaich (he): Actually. I First, the temperature went to infinity as the conserved
David Schaich (he): energy went was set to
David Schaich (he): 0. So what we're seeing here. and this expansion is
David Schaich (he): same behavior from a different perspective where the temperature is fixed, and as we take it large, the internal energy
David Schaich (he): goes to 0.
David Schaich (he): Similarly for the entropy
David Schaich (he): as before, we have I this Beta H. Times hyperbolic tensions
David Schaich (he): a beta h plus.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): this whole first term here
David Schaich (he): talking in the
David Schaich (he): hyperbolic tangents expansion. There we we pick up a plus.
David Schaich (he): It's a one factor of the age from the expansion. The negative sign
David Schaich (he): is the same in both cases. and then the higher order terms will start coming in now at data Hqs times that age. So David
David Schaich (he): the Fourth. each to the fourth.
David Schaich (he): Over here.
David Schaich (he): logarithm, let's say
David Schaich (he): different expansion. To consider it. What we can do is break up the product into a sum of
David Schaich (he): plus
David Schaich (he): hyperbolic cosine of a small number
David Schaich (he): has another serious expansion in there that we hyperbola tangents. First term is one.
David Schaich (he): Let me pick up
David Schaich (he): one over 2 x squared or X's
David Schaich (he): the age. then order
David Schaich (he): X to the
David Schaich (he): fourth
David Schaich (he): inside the Lord. Yes.
David Schaich (he): the Beta H is now our small parameter.
David Schaich (he): so the log of 1, 6 small number
David Schaich (he): is just that
David Schaich (he): small number one half Beta h squared.
David Schaich (he): What's the order
David Schaich (he): to the fourth?
David Schaich (he): So, bringing everything together. we have this constant one of 2, the and minus one half
David Schaich (he): a h from the combination of those 2 terms, and minus one plus a half.
David Schaich (he): and then
David Schaich (he): an infinite series of higher order corrections that come in with a leading term of beta interested in power. For
David Schaich (he): so this is
David Schaich (he): consistent with what we have. But here the Scottish line that the entropy approaches at high temperatures. He is just the logarithm of 2,
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): there is a somewhat more rapid approach going like one over X squared rather than one over X in the energy.
David Schaich (he): but still much
David Schaich (he): the more gradual, of the exponential conversions to the low temperature limits.
David Schaich (he): Something else that is also north. Noting
David Schaich (he): is that in that high temperature limits
David Schaich (he): the entropy itself
David Schaich (he): approaches N. Times log, 2 multiplying through my end.
David Schaich (he): I should see
David Schaich (he): one to the end, which. starting off by you this thing with the long rhythm of the number of microstates. and this relation between the entropy and the logarithm of the number of microstates.
David Schaich (he): It was what we derived
David Schaich (he): for the micro canonical ensemble.
David Schaich (he): It does not hold in general for the economic ensemble, but we see we recovered it
David Schaich (he): from
David Schaich (he): more complicated than mathematics in this high temperature limits
David Schaich (he): to that is. as to is going to infinity. We essentially recover the micro canonic
David Schaich (he): from the economical case. and this can be appreciated by
David Schaich (he): we're calling the form of the microstate probabilities that depend on
David Schaich (he): the energy. So all of those
David Schaich (he): probabilities. the exponential of minus
David Schaich (he): e. I. Over t as t goes to infinity. The argument of the exponential.
David Schaich (he): all right. goes to 0. The exponential itself is approximately one. So every probability is approximately that constant factor. Oh.
David Schaich (he): what over the partition function which itself is just the sum
David Schaich (he): over all microstates of
David Schaich (he): these exponential factors that vanishes high temperatures.
David Schaich (he): So in that limits, and only in that limit.
David Schaich (he): that some is just counting one M. Times for each of the m
David Schaich (he): microstates.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): we have a connection between this canonical
David Schaich (he): analysis and what we have the before or the microcanonic. In this regime, where the high temperature is essentially
David Schaich (he): eradicating, all of the differences between the different microstates that have different internal energies
David Schaich (he): and all small compared to the
David Schaich (he): Now, the question is.
David Schaich (he): what to do. but the
David Schaich (he): other analysis that we have to look at. We've been considering
David Schaich (he): your distinguishable spins embedded in a solid at a particular location. That's the subscript D.
David Schaich (he): And all of these results, for the energy; and
David Schaich (he): if we think about
David Schaich (he): schemes. instead of being embedded in a cellular.
David Schaich (he): they are allowed to move freely
David Schaich (he): as a gas.
David Schaich (he): then they become
David Schaich (he): indistinguishable, and we'll still consider
David Schaich (he): a one dimensional case for simplicity. We have
David Schaich (he): see the same spins as before
David Schaich (he): any line there are
David Schaich (he): any of them fixed temperature team
David Schaich (he): approach in this external magnetic field. H.
David Schaich (he): The differences with the spins being allowed to freely move past each other. We can't
David Schaich (he): saying anything like the 4 point is down, and the third one is all
David Schaich (he): because
David Schaich (he): the even though I've drawn a snapshot of the system Here, as the spins move, they can rearrange.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): we lose track of any labels that we give them like third spin or fourth spend
David Schaich (he): There's no way to
David Schaich (he): pick out a particular spin.
David Schaich (he): So if we consider just
David Schaich (he): the simplest example of
David Schaich (he): a 2 spin system in this gas. Then
David Schaich (he): think about all the possible microstates that we can have.
David Schaich (he): This is similar to a very small system that we used for the
David Schaich (he): replica trick when introducing the canonic what we had
David Schaich (he): 4 possible microstates, with
David Schaich (he): all values of spends being up or down. But if the spins are indistinguishable. then
David Schaich (he): what I've drawn here with this thing on the left being up in the spin on the right being down
David Schaich (he): cannot be distinguished
David Schaich (he): from the skin on the left being down, it's been on the right being
David Schaich (he): so. This is all. Just a single microstate, which we can leave it as microstate 3 compared to microstates. one and 2.
David Schaich (he): So these 2 spins are producing
David Schaich (he): you totally, only 3 microstates.
David Schaich (he): not to be to the end that we had in the distinguishable case.
David Schaich (he): And this is the difference in the pure information coming in between
David Schaich (he): these 2 types of systems. There's a different number of microstates that we have the information
David Schaich (he): to specify.
David Schaich (he): depending on the distinguishability of the
David Schaich (he): so generalizing to the
David Schaich (he): an arbitrary number of
David Schaich (he): in principle. It is only possible to No. The
David Schaich (he): total number of spins that are
David Schaich (he): we take up. We're pointing down
David Schaich (he): for each, my prostate.
David Schaich (he): We can't know which
David Schaich (he): of the spins are the ones that are pointing up, and which other one is pointing down. We don't have access to
David Schaich (he): that information with that legal.
David Schaich (he): and of course the number of up and down
David Schaich (he): uniquely determines the energy that we've been labeling by.
David Schaich (he): You saw that, and minus the number of skins in each direction.
David Schaich (he): So in this case of indistinguishable spins in a gas
David Schaich (he): instead of to the end that microstates
David Schaich (he): you pick up just one microstates
David Schaich (he): for each energy level.
David Schaich (he): So, just as a quick example to
David Schaich (he): make sure this is clear. Okay.
David Schaich (he): look at a slightly larger number of spins. So systems is for spins.
David Schaich (he): How many microstates are we going to have in this case.
David Schaich (he): This is a small enough number of spins that we can just label the whole set of micro space exhaustively.
David Schaich (he): They're given by the energy. We know that the
David Schaich (he): ground state energy is
David Schaich (he): e equal minus. Nh. In this case it is 4, and then the energy gap is 2 times. H: so the
David Schaich (he): first exciting stage. a higher energy. You want to another 2 h to 0, and so on until we get up to into the plus nh.
David Schaich (he): So this minus 4 and h corresponds to all the spins pointing Oh, along with magnetic field. Either the plus 4 age is all over, spends pointing down
David Schaich (he): a line against or opposite to the magnetic field.
David Schaich (he): and the intermediate energies have mixtures of spins pointing upward down. so
David Schaich (he): 2 up and 2 down for the case of 0 energy. But we can't tell which 2 or of all which 2 are down. We just have that single microstate
David Schaich (he): with energy 0. So 5 microstates for N equals 4 generalizes to n plus one
David Schaich (he): microstates; for in general
David Schaich (he): system, within degrees of freedom.
David Schaich (he): what we can do
David Schaich (he): given
David Schaich (he): this pattern of
David Schaich (he): microstates
David Schaich (he): ranging from the ground state energy to
David Schaich (he): the negative of the ground state and the g of maximum possible energy in steps of the Energy Gap.
David Schaich (he): It is he to legal
David Schaich (he): each microstates and i'll call. Now, we'll make a K.
David Schaich (he): With the corresponding energy. So is okay.
David Schaich (he): which is
David Schaich (he): the ground State energy minus N. H.
David Schaich (he): Plus
David Schaich (he): some number of factors. K.
David Schaich (he): Times that energy J.
David Schaich (he): Of 2 inch
we can rearrange by pulling out
David Schaich (he): a factor of minus H.
David Schaich (he): Just have n minus 2 K. Left over.
David Schaich (he): Okay, here
David Schaich (he): is ranging now from
David Schaich (he): 0
David Schaich (he): all the way up to in
David Schaich (he): counting the integer
David Schaich (he): states that we can have. and we can check when K. Is 0. We get that graph, say energy when K is n
David Schaich (he): n minus 2, K is minus and the negative cancel out, and we get the maximum positive energy.
David Schaich (he): And with this
David Schaich (he): set up another 7 notation that's more convenient for the case of indistinguishable spends. We go through exactly the same procedure
David Schaich (he): which will become familiar
David Schaich (he): in the analyses based on the canonical ensemble.
David Schaich (he): He starts
David Schaich (he): with the partition function.
David Schaich (he): So I now for indistinguishable spins.
David Schaich (he): This is the sum overall microstates. E to the
David Schaich (he): minus energy over temperature
David Schaich (he): microstates. Now one
David Schaich (he): from table 0, the end.
David Schaich (he): The energy
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): minus h times
David Schaich (he): and minus 2 K.
David Schaich (he): The minus one over t
David Schaich (he): is equal to Beta.
David Schaich (he): So the exponential of a difference is
David Schaich (he): the product of exponentials. So dividing that into E to the and beta h times e to the minus 2. K. Beta H.
David Schaich (he): Can pull out this overall factor
David Schaich (he): that does not depend on K.
David Schaich (he): And what's left in the sum.
David Schaich (he): There's an E to the minus 2 K Beta H. Which, using another property of exponentials. we can write
David Schaich (he): because e to the minus 2 Beta H
David Schaich (he): raised to the power K:
David Schaich (he): So the E to the minus 2, Beta H. Is that same exponential factor depending on the energy gap that we solve. becoming relevant for distinguishable spins at low temperatures.
David Schaich (he): and the sum of some
David Schaich (he): number raised to the K power is again another
David Schaich (he): avatar of the geometric series
David Schaich (he): that
David Schaich (he): also popped up in
David Schaich (he): our previous analyses.
David Schaich (he): The complication here is that the sum does not run all the way from 0 to infinity.
David Schaich (he): It was only from
David Schaich (he): 8 equals 0 to some finite number of particles.
David Schaich (he): Counting the finite number of Microsoft that we have. we can
David Schaich (he): do a little mathematical trick to
David Schaich (he): deal with this. my writing this as the difference between 2 over the 5 geometric series.
David Schaich (he): next to the power K, some from a 0 to infinity. and then subtracting all from by turn everything
David Schaich (he): larger than X to the power in.
David Schaich (he): We should always be cautious when rearranging infinite sums.
David Schaich (he): In this way This is one rearrangement that turns out to be legitimate and not cause some problems. Every with the power of X to the
David Schaich (he): and plus one or higher cancels off between these 2 series.
David Schaich (he): and that's what it our target
David Schaich (he): Reading X as
David Schaich (he): E. To the minus 2 Beta H.
David Schaich (he): Which
David Schaich (he): you know, it has
David Schaich (he): magnitude less than one so greater than 0 thinks of properties of that exponential function. In fact, with the temperature and magnetic field
David Schaich (he): Positive.
David Schaich (he): So this geometric series is the
David Schaich (he): one over one minus x that we saw before. If we
David Schaich (he): cool out
David Schaich (he): the factor of X to the n plus one that appears in every term. and this expression. So x to the end force one.
David Schaich (he): We can then some
David Schaich (he): a power of X to the L. Where L is what is left after pulling out n plus one.
David Schaich (he): So all the self w from 0 to infinity.
David Schaich (he): Another geometric series that gives us
David Schaich (he): in total one minus x to the n plus one
David Schaich (he): divided by one minus x.
David Schaich (he): So, plugging this into the partition function.
David Schaich (he): We're x's. The exponential of
David Schaich (he): minus 2 Beta h. We have that overall factor
David Schaich (he): times this ratio. one by the C minus 2 n plus one.
David Schaich (he): By the by.
David Schaich (he): just that one minus x.
David Schaich (he): Our x is e to the minus 2 beta h
David Schaich (he): can be it corresponding
David Schaich (he): hope. It's free energy.
David Schaich (he): It is.
David Schaich (he): You see here.
David Schaich (he): logarithm of this partition function
David Schaich (he): divided by that. So we get 3
David Schaich (he): terms in this logarithm. If you break up that product in the partition function into a sum of the logs.
David Schaich (he): the first is the and then the overall negative sign.
David Schaich (he): It is cancel. and we have an H.
David Schaich (he): Then we pick up the logarithm of that Numerator.
David Schaich (he): Yeah, one over paid up.
David Schaich (he): It's not cancel. It's his
David Schaich (he): power of n plus one
David Schaich (he): in the exponential
David Schaich (he): and the logarithm of one over the function brings in an additional
David Schaich (he): negative negative sign that cancel out the definition of help that's free energy. And this is just the more rhythm
David Schaich (he): of the one minus E to the minus 2 beta h in the denominator. So this is
David Schaich (he): clearly difference compared to the that we can. And in case of the remind you, what's that?
David Schaich (he): More than twice the kind of like cosine of Beta H, the overall factor of.
David Schaich (he): and i'll be it over at times, the temperature T.
David Schaich (he): And this in turn
David Schaich (he): I need to
David Schaich (he): different results for
David Schaich (he): the average internal energy
David Schaich (he): and the entropy in the case of indistinguishable spins.
David Schaich (he): which is not on the homework you tomorrow, but will be on the
David Schaich (he): second homework assignment, not due until after the break.
David Schaich (he): You may want to start working through this calculation, while
David Schaich (he): the derivation is a question of what we can look at, just to
David Schaich (he): wrap up
David Schaich (he): this application of the
David Schaich (he): our comparisons
David Schaich (he): between the
David Schaich (he): energies and entropies, or distinguishable versus indistinguishable spins which
David Schaich (he): it's for clarity. I've now put on to separate obviously solid blue ones are the same distinguishable results that we had
David Schaich (he): previously, and
David Schaich (he): you will find that the in distributional results do not have overall factors in. but it can't be evenly divided out by in this way.
David Schaich (he): So what's being done in these spots is that in it's being fixed to 4,
David Schaich (he): so a few things to
David Schaich (he): notes
David Schaich (he): about the behavior of the energy and entropy.
David Schaich (he): Hey, there! These 2 cases with different information, content First of all. yeah limits of both the energy and the entropy
David Schaich (he): at F 0 temperature are the same.
David Schaich (he): So this is the case where
David Schaich (he): the ground state is essentially controlling all aspects of the system can do it. The single ground state is the same for
David Schaich (he): both cases of distinguishable, and in the
David Schaich (he): you can also see that
David Schaich (he): in both cases there is a faster conversions to that ground state. In the in the sensual case, the red dash down the lines.
David Schaich (he): You so are always smaller than the the similar case that it's just due to
David Schaich (he): the smaller number of microstates that we have on the spins are indistinguishable
David Schaich (he): in the limit of high temperatures.
David Schaich (he): The energy
David Schaich (he): always goes to
David Schaich (he): 0. As t approaches, infinity
David Schaich (he): again
David Schaich (he): approaches this more slowly. So
David Schaich (he): that is the
okay sure
David Schaich (he): high temperature limits.
David Schaich (he): and there's someone
David Schaich (he): quicker approach in the distinguishable case.
David Schaich (he): Then, for the in this single one.
David Schaich (he): and something more interesting happens for the entropy.
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): that
David Schaich (he): in the high temperature limits
David Schaich (he): the individual entropy. S. I
David Schaich (he): approaches
David Schaich (he): the board of N plus one, which is the the dashboard line shown here rather than approaching
David Schaich (he): the logarithm of 2;
David Schaich (he): and this is
David Schaich (he): again
David Schaich (he): in correspondence to the number of microstates that we have in the system
David Schaich (he): compared to the
David Schaich (he): exponentially fewer microstates
David Schaich (he): to some over in the partition function. and plus one in the in this initial case versus 2 to the end which we can't.
David Schaich (he): the exponential
David Schaich (he): of en block 2.
David Schaich (he): So this leads to
David Schaich (he): a clear difference between the entropy
David Schaich (he): depending on the pure information content of these systems, which maybe
David Schaich (he): what you had expected, given the
David Schaich (he): sort of way of interpreting entropy as the amount of information
David Schaich (he): that is
David Schaich (he): obtainable without a system, a concept you may well have encountered. If we're taking this module, we just now put that on
David Schaich (he): you. That medical foundation from the canonical ensemble. There you are
David Schaich (he): an application of probability spaces with fixed temperature and technical number. Maybe more striking. Is that
David Schaich (he): the energy itself to something that is
David Schaich (he): alright. a simple and straightforward thing to measure
David Schaich (he): in experiments.
David Schaich (he): Yes.
David Schaich (he): clearly difference between
David Schaich (he): these 2 different systems of distinguishable and in the central space. So, even though the 2 systems approach the same 0 temperature limits
David Schaich (he): and the same high temperature limit they go with go to
David Schaich (he): 0. As the temperature goes through infinity.
David Schaich (he): They both go to minus one. With this normalization.
David Schaich (he): as the temperature goes to absolute 0.
David Schaich (he): If we were to
David Schaich (he): measure the energies of these systems at any non-zero temperature.
David Schaich (he): I would get
David Schaich (he): different results that would actually allow us to
David Schaich (he): determine in principle whether this spin or is it distinguishable or not.
David Schaich (he): It's just to say they're
David Schaich (he): physically measurable effect
David Schaich (he): from the intrinsic information content
David Schaich (he): of the 2 types of students systems we've worked at a measurement of the energy will tell us what is knowable about the screens in principle, even if we
David Schaich (he): No, no a priori.
David Schaich (he): Which
David Schaich (he): type of system we're looking at, whether the spins are distinguishable or not.
David Schaich (he): This is a physical manifestation of pure information remains.
David Schaich (he): hey? Very active field and research. Yeah. let's see. Famous
David Schaich (he): quote by
David Schaich (he): that information. so is physical. informs the foundation for a great deal of physical behavior.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): that was that reps up. This
David Schaich (he): first application of the canonical sample. Looking at the physics of the information we got through the
David Schaich (he): in distinguishable case a bit more quickly because you get to do some of the boarding work yourself, turning through the derivatives and the limits to
David Schaich (he): get the predictions that we looked at any questions before we move on to something else, a different application of the canonical ensemble.
David Schaich (he): The next application that
David Schaich (he): we won't wrap up today, and i'll probably continue
David Schaich (he): is next week
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): here. You are
David Schaich (he): the famous topic that
David Schaich (he): you may well have heard about in
David Schaich (he): a levels or other modules.
David Schaich (he): ideal gases.
David Schaich (he): and in contrast to the a level where we will be deriving the
David Schaich (he): behavior about real gases, things known as the ideal gas wall from the fundamental microscopic dynamics
David Schaich (he): analyzed with the
David Schaich (he): tools of statistical physics that we have developed. and at least for the time being. we will start off. I saw
David Schaich (he): application by considering it
David Schaich (he): a particular sort of ideal gas
David Schaich (he): bicycle
David Schaich (he): Ideal gas is
David Schaich (he): so let's break down what
David Schaich (he): each of these terms meetings and tells us about the system we're going to be looking at the classical one, is
David Schaich (he): it is not quantum. and since I don't expect you to know anything about quantum physics for this module. All this news that you don't have to worry about, that it's a
David Schaich (he): a gas that behaves as we are used to thinking about
David Schaich (he): ever since Newton wrote down his loss of motion 350 years ago. In particular. we can assume that we and it know exactly
David Schaich (he): you both the position and the momentum of every particle and
David Schaich (he): three-dimensional space.
David Schaich (he): So that position is labeled by the next Y and Z
David Schaich (he): in 3 dimensions left, right up, down, forward, backward, and there's a corresponding component of the momentum in each of those 3 directions.
David Schaich (he): I guess similarly to not having to worry about quantum physics.
David Schaich (he): The
David Schaich (he): that means we don't have to worry about
David Schaich (he): relativistic effects. So each particle in these gases
David Schaich (he): alright, go on and you moving slowly we are slowly measured compared to the of what 300 millionmeters per second.
David Schaich (he): so we can ignore the effects of relativity and the energy of each particle in
David Schaich (he): It's just going to be
David Schaich (he): usual expression that I suspect you've seen before one over twice the mass of the Particle Times. the square of its momentum. Where this is.
David Schaich (he): you get your product over the free components of that momentum.
David Schaich (he): So pn squared.
David Schaich (he): Yes.
David Schaich (he): so of squares. P. X squared plus p y squared
in. Here
David Schaich (he): is the mass of each particle.
David Schaich (he): The final adjective that
David Schaich (he): we have here
David Schaich (he): is dealing with an ideal gas.
David Schaich (he): and this is
David Schaich (he): there. You go
David Schaich (he): even more significant simplification. Because
David Schaich (he): what ideal means in this context is that there are no interactions.
David Schaich (he): queen any of the individual particles
David Schaich (he): in the gas, so that people will allergy
David Schaich (he): in micro-states with n particles. It's just given by the sum over the
David Schaich (he): individual energy and squared of each of those and particles all assumed to have
David Schaich (he): the same mass, so particles of the same species.
David Schaich (he): the cost of mass, and we can pull out of that. So
David Schaich (he): So the setup that we're going to have gets back to the the picture that we
David Schaich (he): starting off looking at today.
David Schaich (he): Some collection of particles place in the volume at this temperature. and for an ideal gaps
David Schaich (he): turn out to be significant. So we will need to discuss that with some care.
So
David Schaich (he): our usual canonical setup.
David Schaich (he): because in particles
David Schaich (he): good for you.
David Schaich (he): It's by that large external, formal reservoir.
David Schaich (he): and to be concrete. you will say that the
David Schaich (he): container that we're putting these end particles up the gas in.
David Schaich (he): He is a cubic box.
David Schaich (he): and it's just 3 powers of in length in each of the 3 mentions of space that we have to deal with. So X. Why, him said. are you changing from
David Schaich (he): 0 to l
David Schaich (he): of that in the alignment.
David Schaich (he): and as always with the to see third time today that we want to start.
David Schaich (he): It's the partition function all right again.
David Schaich (he): because we have a
David Schaich (he): problem here. We try to think about
David Schaich (he): bicycle ideal gas particle instead. You might have been considering it at the start of today's lecture.
David Schaich (he): This partition function is summing over all microstates.
David Schaich (he): Those microstates are fine
David Schaich (he): by the energy and the energy in turn
David Schaich (he): by the momenta. So yeah.
David Schaich (he): energy ei of each microstates. he's coming problem.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): we vector momento. And we
David Schaich (he): would assume in the classical context, just to be continuous real numbers.
David Schaich (he): In other words, there are
David Schaich (he): an uncountably infinite number of momenta, even for a single particle.
David Schaich (he): So how to you
David Schaich (he): terms in this partition function. Assuming that we have a countable number of Microsoft system over is
David Schaich (he): and ill posed
David Schaich (he): proposition.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): the sum here
David Schaich (he): is a problem when we have continuous moments up and uncountably infinite
David Schaich (he): number of microstates to account for.
David Schaich (he): and the solution is not necessarily thinking about this. What we need to do
David Schaich (he): handle. This situation
David Schaich (he): is a procedure known as regularization.
David Schaich (he): So we need to regulate the system and what this means exactly express the system in terms of countable microstates
David Schaich (he): that we and so over
David Schaich (he): 2,
David Schaich (he): a well-defined partition function.
David Schaich (he): And then.
David Schaich (he): after we have that modified partition, function. you take the limits in which the
David Schaich (he): some can be expressed as
David Schaich (he): integral over the continuous degrees of freedom that we want to consider it. So what we will do is to
David Schaich (he): declare as a regularization
David Schaich (he): that only certainly moment so are possible.
David Schaich (he): So, rather than the momentum for each particle being continuous, real numbers.
David Schaich (he): you will
David Schaich (he): the people we allowed
David Schaich (he): moment of the Xq. Line.
David Schaich (he): he said. Take the form
David Schaich (he): of some pre-factor. That depends on the length of our volume.
David Schaich (he): Times is pure numbers
David Schaich (he): K. X. K. Y. And K. Z.
David Schaich (he): Where each of these numbers
David Schaich (he): is a non-negative integer starting from 0, that goes off to infinity. So there is still an infinite number of. But you are obviously
David Schaich (he): countable because we are accounting them here.
David Schaich (he): It's pre-factor and H. Bar. He is known as the plank it so really less interesting than it looks. All it is is a unit conversion
David Schaich (he): factor
David Schaich (he): that's
David Schaich (he): the inverse length one over L on the right hand side of this equation.
David Schaich (he): The the moments of he that we have on the left hand side.
David Schaich (he): and this is some. It's something you may have heard about or encountered before.
David Schaich (he): because we have
David Schaich (he): chosen a set of
David Schaich (he): discrete momentum that
David Schaich (he): turn out to be similar to those that are realized in nature sometimes call
David Schaich (he): quantized momenta
David Schaich (he): basis of quantum physics.
David Schaich (he): However, I should say that here we're not doing anything quantum. What we are doing is just imposing an odds
David Schaich (he): on what allowed moment to
David Schaich (he): we have that are accountable. It can give us their efficient function.
And then
David Schaich (he): the fact that this ons is a physically relevant one is just a nice coincidence
David Schaich (he): that
David Schaich (he): we we will revisit later in the Module.
David Schaich (he): When we do consider autumn gases we are, there is some physics countenance to each on Thomas Momenta.
David Schaich (he): See the time
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): wrap up today with one
David Schaich (he): final step
David Schaich (he): at the
David Schaich (he): the energies that we have based on these discrete momentum
David Schaich (he): are also discrete and countable.
David Schaich (he): So we had. Yes.
David Schaich (he): the energy for
David Schaich (he): certain particle was P. Squared over 2 M.
David Schaich (he): We have
David Schaich (he): this expression for P. So we can substitute in to get an H bar squared high, squared over 2, and L. Squared
David Schaich (he): with
David Schaich (he): from the inner product is some of those 3 numbers K. Eightx squared, plus k is that square which we can call just a constant script. E
David Schaich (he): times.
David Schaich (he): Yes. 3 squared numbers.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): you see here, we can read off. Hr. Squared high, squared over 2 and L squared. and
David Schaich (he): we see that the
David Schaich (he): Lewis energy is again to fall into
David Schaich (he): energy levels similar to what we had with the spin system.
David Schaich (he): with some differences. save that in terms of the possible numbers. the possible energies that we can have.
David Schaich (he): So the lowest possible energy when each of a X K. Y. In case that are 0, is just 0.
David Schaich (he): You can then have. I know, one of those 3. You need one. We need 2 of the 3 being one, so we have one plus one is 2 for free.
David Schaich (he): If one of them is 2 or 2 squared is 4, we could have a 4 plus one plus 0,
David Schaich (he): 4 plus one plus one.
David Schaich (he): Then we have to go on to Hello. 2 of them being 2
David Schaich (he): should be 4 plus 4 plus 0 gives 8.
David Schaich (he): I One of them is 3, 10, and 11. If all 3 are 2.
David Schaich (he): If one is 3, and one is 2, we have 9, plus 4, it's 13, yeah, 14 for 9 plus 4 plus one.
David Schaich (he): Then we jump to 9, plus 4 plus 4, which is
David Schaich (he): 17, and you can go on from there.
David Schaich (he): What we know is that in contrast to the spin system
David Schaich (he): these energies are not all, even in space. There's no cost in energy. J.
David Schaich (he): We don't have
David Schaich (he): any way too good step in
David Schaich (he): 15 and 16 or
David Schaich (he): I'm sorry. No, it's. You can get 16 from the 4 squared, but we can't get 15,
David Schaich (he): and there will be similar gaps in the possible energies as we go higher up. So
David Schaich (he): sorry for a couple of minutes over. That's we're all stop for now. The next call for questions about this and the pick up with the partition function for
David Schaich (he): ideal gases tomorrow afternoon, not in this room, but back
David Schaich (he): next door. I'm told that the
David Schaich (he): fixed. So we won't. Have a repeat of the issue of last time
David Schaich (he): the work with the homework at all. See you tomorrow. Yeah.